# Theological Background/Framing of Question

Since 2000, with the publication of Bruce McCormack’s controversial essay, “Grace and Being…”, English language theologians have been engaged in a sporadic, intense, not always civil debate about the internal consistency of Karl Barth’s *Church Dogmatics*, specifically regarding the relation between the doctrine of the Trinity and the doctrine of election. According to self-labelled “traditionalists,” Barth’s Trinitarian theology is internally consistent, and while the doctrine of election, presented centrally in CD II/2, paragraph 33, is a revolution in Christian theology, it does not alter Barth’s theological ontology. The not self-labelled “revisionists” argue that Barth’s stunning doctrine of election  in paragraph 33 has implications for his theological ontology, such that parts of the *Dogmatics* after paragraph 33 are not logically coherent with the doctrine of God as Trinity presented prior to paragraph 33. The debate has been carried out through essays, books, and presentations, and, methodologically, has revolved around the close interpretation of a relatively small number of passages from Barth’s sprawling *Church Dogmatics*. Yet, fifteen years into the debate, there seems to be no consensus and little shift in perspective, as evidenced by the recent publication of a new book on the issue and a sharply critical essay of that book.[^1] In this paper, we ask whether approaching Barth’s *Church Dogmatics* differently, from an algorithmic view of the whole corpus, might provide a possible intervention into this debate. We argue that while some of the standard text analysis techniques — topic modeling, tf-idf analysis, k-means clustering, and document classification — provide interesting and useful insight into Barth’s *Dogmatics*, they provide minimal data particularly impactful for this debate.

Need to have a better, more accurate thesis statement here

## Background on Barth, *CD*

[Not sure if we need to have background on Barth and the *CD* or not. Here's what I came up with. It's not really any shorter than what was there originally, but it's goes into more explanation. I'm throwing it in here for reference, but I think that what you have above is fine.]

Traditionally, English language theologians have assumed that Karl Barth thought consistently about the doctrine of the Trinity throughout the course of his *Church Dogmatics*. Barth was perhaps the greatest Protestant theologian of the twentieth century, and when he began publishing the *Church Dogmatics* in 1932, he conceived of it as a comprehensive articulation of Christian theology. He published the last volume, the fourth, in 1967, and he was working on the next volume when he died in 1968.

But in 2000, Bruce McCormack published his controversial essay, “Grace and Being: The role of God’s gracious election in Karl Barth’s theological ontology.” He maintained that at the point Barth tackles the doctrine of election, the doctrine that a person’s salvation depends on God’s election, this represented a divide in Barth’s thought. Barth talked about this in *CD* II/2, paragraph 33. (Each paragraph is a length exploration of a single topic, not what you’re thinking of.) Traditionally, theologians have viewed this paragraph as a revolution of Christian theology, but McCormack maintained that in a sense it ruptured the consistency of Barth’s theological ontology: that how Barth laid out the doctrine of the Trinity before paragraph 33 is not consistent with how he talks about it later.

Theologians have hotly debated McCormack's thesis in essays, books, and presentations. But thus far, the argument has focused on how one interprets a relatively small number of passages from Barth’s sprawling *Church Dogmatics*. And fifteen years into the debate, there seems to be no consensus and little shift in perspective. In this paper, we ask whether approaching Barth’s *Church Dogmatics* differently, from an algorithmic view of the whole corpus, might provide a possible intervention into this debate. We argue that while some of the standard text analysis techniques — topic modeling, tf-idf analysis, and document classification — provide interesting and useful insight into Barth’s *Dogmatics*, and even broad level support for McCormack’s claim, they fail to directly address the specifics of the debate. We suggest that this is in part due to the nature of the techniques themselves, and in part due to Barth’s rhetorical style. 

## The brief history of the debate

In 2000, Bruce McCormack published “Grace and Being: The role of God’s gracious election in Karl Barth’s theological Ontology,” in *The Cambridge Companion to Karl Barth*.[^2] In this essay, McCormack pointedly argued that Barth’s most significant contribution to theology is his recasting of the doctrine of election, which is materially revolutionary and supplies a “hermeneutic rule which would allow the church to speak authoritatively about what God was doing — and, indeed, who and what God was/is — before the foundation of the world,’ *without engaging in speculation*.”[^3] Barth’s doctrine does this by reworking the Reformed doctrine of election. In the fairly traditional form of double predestination, the doctrine holds that God in a pre-temporal decision elects or determines some people for salvation, and some people for reprobation or damnation.[^4] As well, much of the Western theological tradition has held that God as the Trinity, the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, is the subject of election, the One who elects, while the person Jesus of Nazareth, the Christ, is the object of election. Jesus Christ is the first object of God’s electing activity, and humanity is then an object through participation in Christ or as a secondary object of God’s act.

According to McCormack, Barth modifies both elements. While he first presents his thesis in “Grace and Being,” he presents the same points in a clearer manner in a later essay from 2010, “Election and Trinity: Theses in response to George Hunsinger,” and I’ll focus on that essay.[^5] First, for Barth, the double structure of God’s electing activity has as its object Jesus Christ. In Jesus, God elects Christ’s humanity to salvation, and Christ’s divinity to reprobation.[^6] This means that, in some way, damnation is part of God’s own life. Humanity, then, has its salvation in its ontological constitution through Christ’s own humanity.[^7] One might note also that situating Christ’s humanity, and perhaps all humanity in him, as the beneficiary of God’s electing will opens the possibility of, but doesn’t necessarily logically entail, a doctrine of universal salvation. Jesus Christ is not just the object of God’s eternal election though; Barth states that Jesus Christ is also the subject of election.[^8] According to McCormack, Barth’s explanation of this claim has significant implications for his theological ontology and his doctrine of the Trinity. For Jesus Christ to be the subject of election, then Jesus Christ, the temporally located historical person, must be the identity of the Son in all eternity. If this is correct, then there is not when the Logos had an identity other than that of Jesus Christ.[^9] McCormack traces this conclusion to its logical end: there is no  *Logos asarkos* prior to or apart from the *Logos incarnandus* and *Logos incarnatus*.[^10]

McCormack’s argument in support of the above claims is impressive, and a number of scholars have found his work compelling both as a constructive theological ontology and a reading of significant line in Barth’s theology coming out of the doctrine of election. Yet, a significant segment of Barth scholars and theologians have vigorously resisted his account. George Hunsinger is, perhaps, foremost among those who argue for a reading of Barth that emphasizes internal consistency across the span of the *Dogmatics*, along with Barth’s coherence with Chalcedonian Orthodoxy in his Trinitarian and Christological positions.[^11] Relevant to the above points from McCormack, Hunsinger argues that while we must take Barth seriously when he writes that Jesus Christ is the subject of election, we must understand what Barth meant by it by way of Barth’s theological commitments expressed throughout the whole of the *Dogmatics*.[^12] Concretely, Hunsinger argues that due to Barth’s commitment to the perfection of God’s being-in-Godself, often referred to as the immanent Trinity, God’s eternal identity is wholly independent from creation, which is a contingent, temporal existence.[^13] When Barth says that Jesus Christ is the subject of election, an eternal decision or act of God, we must understand that the eternal Son or Logos is the subject of election, and Jesus of Nazareth is only the subject of election in a certain way (in alium quid).[^14] In accordance with the unity of the human and divine in Jesus Christ, it is theological appropriate to speak of Jesus as the subject of election, but only according to his divinity, not his humanity. Christ’s humanity is part of finite, contingent reality, and, on this reading, cannot be part of an eternal decision in and by God. On Hunsinger’s reading, Barth would still support the existence of a *Logos asarkos* that is neither *incarnandus* or *incarnatus*, whose identity has nothing to do in itself with the historical person Jesus of Nazareth.[^15]

As mentioned at the beginning of this paper, this is an ongoing, fractious debate. It is also a debate that has hinged on close interpretation of a relatively small set of passages from the *Church Dogmatics*. Where, when, and how, can an algorithmic approach intervene in this debate? Part of the debate is about the internal consistency of Barth, and about just how significant a shift in the *Dogmatics* the doctrine of election of paragraph 33 is. At the broadest level, then, an algorithmic approach can attempt to determine whether there are identifiable, significant shifts in the text. If there are, can they be materially connected to Barth’s doctrine of election? More narrowly, can we detect changes in Barth’s writing that directly reflect the shifted theological ontology and Christology that McCormack argues are evident in Barth’s work post-election?

# Topic modeling the whole corpus

Our first approach to the *Dogmatics* is through topic modeling, one of the most popular textual analysis methods. David Blei suggests that topic modeling can “uncover hidden thematic structure” in texts.[^16] Given our particular questions, we approached the corpus in two ways. We ran topic models at various numbers of topics on the *Church Dogmatics* as a whole, gaining insight into the large scale themes that seem to structure the work and how the balance of themes changes throughout the *Dogmatics*. Since our concern is with shifts based on paragraph 33, we also broke the corpus into two large chunks: paragraphs 1 to 32, and paragraphs 34 through 73 plus the fragment that Barth was writing just before his death.[^17] We ran topic models on both chunks, aiming to get a slightly more fine-grained image of the two parts of Barth's work, and determining whether any surfaced topics were constituted in a manner that reflects the doctrine of election as a determinative force. While we paid close attention to the topics that explicitly referenced election or immediately related terms[^18], we were also attentive to topics engaged with Christology, the Trinity, reconciliation, and theological ontology more broadly, given the interconnection of these areas with Barth’s doctrine of election.

At the level of the whole *Dogmatics* we found that running only 20 topics provided a strong and clear image of the textual themes. While running at higher numbers of topics provided more granular thematic focus, close attention to the broader 20 topics was sufficient to gain a sense of the overall scope and movement of the *Dogmatics*. Within the 20 topics, there were topics that could be clearly identified with two different aspects of Barth's doctrine of election, including the ontological aspect of concern here, as well as topics that clearly represented his doctrine of God according to its more classical formulation and his doctrine of reconciliation, considered to be his most mature work. The doctrine of reconciliation is also a key area of concern in the debate over theological ontology between McCormack and Hunsinger.

Figure 1. 20 Topics for whole *Dogmatics*

[Think we might be able to shorten by presenting these in order of importance and how we they support our thesis, and then cutting one or more to match our time.]

The most important topics for our analysis are topics 2, 5, 11, 12, 14, 16, and 19. I'll briefly look at the shape of each topic across all the paragraphs of Barth's work, then look at general trends in related topics across the whole in connection to our question.

Figure 2: topic-02 across all paragraphs
Figure 3: topic-05

I take topic 2 to be indicating an aspect of Barth's Christology, especially in terms of God's activity. It's inclusion of words such as 'god,' 'man,' 'jesus,' 'word,' and 'divine' seem to indicate focus on the person of Jesus as both divine and human. Other top words, such as 'act' and 'grace', might provide a context of God's activity for this particular Christological theme. Looking at its distribution, we can see the presence of topic 2 throughout the whole corpus, with a peak in paragraph 44 ("Man as the Creature of God"), and a number of spikes, primarily after paragraph 33, where Barth's elaborates his doctrine of election, in its Trinitarian and Christological focus. We can see that on average, this topic is more present in texts after paragraph 33, with several chunks: 33-39, 43-47, 55-61, and 63-66. This would accord with the explicit structure of the *Dogmatics*, as it shifts from the Trinity and epistemology, through the doctrine of God, to creation, and finally the doctrine of reconciliation. The topic distribution also indicates the increasing presence of this Christological formulation throughout after the doctrine of election.

Topic 5 is closely related to topic 2. While it doesn't specifically mention reconciliation, it focuses on Jesus Christ and includes key words for the understanding of God's saving action in Christ: "grace," "judgement," "death," "sin," "justification," and "righteousness." We might label this more specifically related to the doctrine of justification in traditional Protestant doctrinal loci, but it is a significant part of Barth's doctrine of reconciliation, and itself very focused on what happens for humanity at the highest level within the activity of God in relation Jesus Christ. We see, accordingly, its presence in many paragraphs throughout the *Dogmatics*, but a much more substantial presence in paragraphs 57 through 66, which explicitly constitute Barth's doctrine of reconciliation.

Figure 4: topic-11

Topic 11 represents Barth's more classically formulated doctrine of God, where Barth describes God's identity in terms of the divine attributes. We see these in the topic's words: "power," "love," "freedom," "glory," and "omnipotence." As generally expected, this topic has its peak and spikes within paragraphs 28 through 31, Barth's explicit doctrine of God. Examining the distribution of the topic over all paragraphs, we can note that while it appears regularly and somewhat substantially in the paragraphs from the beginning of the *Dogmatics* through those just mentioned, it regularly constitutes very little of the texts after paragraph 53, and largely disappears within the paragraphs detailing Barth's doctrine of reconciliation.

[Based on this description of topic 11, I wonder if another study might be whether Barth introduces a topic and keeps reworking it and revisiting it later, or whether he thinking ahead about a topic and foreshadows it before finally resolving it in the section where he deals with it explicitly. Another study for another time. Or rather, in what situations or topics does he do either and why?]

Figure 5: topic-14

Topic 14 also strongly indicates the doctrine of God, though with a focus on the doctrine of the Trinity. We see the names of all three person (Spirit, Son, and Father), along with "God," "Trinity," and "Christ." Moreover, given "doctrine," "statement," and "concept," this topic seems to refer to Barth's more formal and focused explication of the doctrinal locus. In contrast, Barth is well known for elaborating an account of the Trinity in IV/1 indirectly by way of his doctrine of reconciliation. Topic 14 peaks early in the *Dogmatics*, in paragraphs 9 and 12, and has its other high points in paragraphs between 8 and 16. More broadly, we can see that the topic is very strong in the early sections of the *Dogmatics*, has some presence in paragraphs 29 through 33 (which deal explicitly with the doctrine of God and election), and has little to no presence after paragraph 42. Given that Barth did engage with the doctrine of the Trinity, though indirectly, throughout volume IV, we might ask why the only topic that very directly references all three persons of the Trinity has little presence therein.

Figure 6: topic-16
<!-- TODO: consider pulling this into the first set of topics — about reconciliation -->
As a contrast to previous doctrines that specifically engaged the doctrine of God by way of Christology, the Trinity, or divine attributes, topic 16 engages Christian life within the context of reconciliation. The presence of this final word is fairly indicative, but we find also reference to "world," "word," "history," "act," and "event." These words give context to reconciliation, indicating its character as part of God's working toward and with the world, in the person of Jesus Christ. The presence of "christ" and "jesus" are also important; reconciliation has a Christological focus for Barth, but one wherein Jesus is a primary agent. When we look at the distribution of this topic, we can see quickly that it has little presence throughout the *Dogmatics* until the final paragraphs, especially 69 through the fragment at the end. Finally, the inclusion of both "act" and "event" in this topic is significant. Reconciliation is an event that occurs in the relation between God and humanity, centered and enacted in the person of Jesus Christ. McCormack would read these inclusions as perhaps indicative of the fully actualistic ontology that he argues that Barth embraces throughout volume IV, and its composition generally supports this point. However, Hunsinger could just as well accept the increasing presence of an actualistic ontology, given that his interpretation of it has it cohere well with his more traditional metaphysical understanding of Barth's doctrine of the Trinity throughout the *Dogmatics.*

Figure 7: topic-19

Topic 19 is the most self-evidently relevant topic for our research question. It specifically mentions "election," "predestination," and "providence," clearly indicating that it is about the doctrine of election. Even more specifically it contains "eternal," "decree," and "decision," perfectly indicating it's high peak, paragraph 33, in which Barth engages election as God's eternal decree or decision. We do in fact see paragraph 33 as the peak of this topic, with spikes in 32, 48, 49, and 57. Paragraph 57, notably, is the first paragraph of Barth's doctrine of reconciliation, entitled, "The Work of God the Reconciler." Overall, this topic is low throughout the whole of the *Dogmatics*, with high chunks only in paragraphs 32-33, 48-49, and 57. This is not unsurprising, given that the topic is significantly defined by words explicitly constrained to the doctrine of election, with less applicability in other doctrines, e.g. predestination, providence, election.

Figure 8: Topic-03

We have one other election topic, which I consider less relevant to this question, but which has to be noted. Topic 3 also specifically engages "election", but is packed with terms related specifically to Israel and God's history with Israel. It casts election specifically in terms of the election of Israel and the Jews, and relates that to the election of Jesus Christ. Not surprisingly, this topic has it's peak at paragraph 34, "The Election of the Community," and its only other high point in paragraph 35, "The Election of the Individual." It has little to no presence prior to paragraph 30, and only a very low presence after 35. Given its focus on the community and Israel, it has little to do with election as it is a concern for McCormack, Hunsinger, and their other conversation partners.

[Is the word *election*, which I bolded below, the word that you want? I'm not sure what other word you meant? *Reconciliation*?]

We can draw a few conclusions from the analysis so far. Given that we can isolate a set of topics that represents the doctrine of God in its more classical, formal presentation in Barth's work, we can say that such a presentation of the Trinity and the attributes of God is prominent prior to the doctrine of election, and rare afterward. And given that we can isolate a set of topics that represent reconciliation, we can say that talk of the Trinity in a formal manner declines as the *Dogmatics* progresses, giving way to a greater focus on Christology, history, and the act/event of God's saving work in Christ. Further, as there is a single topic that represents election in its eternal act character focused on God's decree, we can note that while election is significant in the explicit election chapters, it's presence is generally low, with only a bit of resurgence in the latter half of the *Dogmatics*, and without significant presence in the paragraphs on **election**, wherein one might, on McCormack's reading, suspect it. Thus, while election is itself not topically pivotal, paragraph 33 still seems relatively important as a dividing line in the *Dogmatics* between a formal account of God as the Trinity, and a more dynamic, actualistic account of the Trinity centered on God's action in relation to humanity in the person of Jesus Christ. Does this confirm one McCormack or Hunsinger? Neither, really, though I would argue that it leans toward McCormack. Yet, we need more evidence more directly related to theological ontology and election before we can determine whether this analysis points toward an ontologically determinative role for Barth's doctrine of election.

Given the supposed centrality of the doctrine of election as given in paragraph 33, we broke down the corpus into those paragraphs before 33 and those after 33, to determine whether election or related topics would surface given the exclusion of 33. We used 30 topics in each case, which gave us a more fine-grained view that did surface two election topics in each corpus chunk (before and after 33). Given that the election topics in the whole corpus showed two primary aspects to Barth's doctrine of election, we wanted to make sure that we weren't missing some aspect due to inclusion in a broader topic.

Figure 9: Before 33, Topic-01
Figure 10: Before 33, Topic-04

What we found was interesting. In the model of the paragraphs before 33, we have two topics that involve election. Topic 1 is about the doctrine itself as part of God's salvific work, and uses much of the classical doctrinal language: "election," "predestination," "electing," and "decree." It is couched in terms of doctrinal history though, with the inclusion of "doctrine," "reformed," and "calvin." Accordingly we see this topic spike at paragraph 32, which specifically sets up election as a doctrinal issue to be engaged, and is otherwise non-evident in the first part of the *Dogmatics.* Topic 4 is less focused and less clearly about election at all. It involves more general focus on religion as such ("religion," "truth," "mysticism") and what distinguishes Christian religion from other religions ("grace," "israel," "election"). The inclusion of "election" here is interesting, but doesn't clearly give us Barth's understanding of election. This topic spikes at paragraph 17, where Barth engages with the problem of religion as such, and is otherwise little evident. We can see generally that without paragraph 33 involved, the paragraphs leading up to 33 have little to do with Barth's revolutionary doctrine.

Figure 11: After 33, Topic-12
Figure 12: After 33, Topic-17

The model of the paragraphs after 33 also surfaced two topics regarding election, and these more substantially so than in the prior section. We find an interesting degree of similarity between these two topics though. Both topic 12 and topic 17 mention "election," "jesus," and "christ" within the context of God's relation to Israel. Topic 12 is perhaps more focused on the person of Jesus in the line of prophets, on Jesus' narrative in the Scripture ("prophet," "witness," "david," "king") while topic 17 seem more focused on the large scale relation of God to the Jewish and Gentile communities ("jews," "gentiles," "people," "community"). In neither do we see the same focus on Jesus as part of God's eternal decree that we found in a topic in the whole *Dogmatics*. Perhaps unsurprisingly, both topics 12 and 17 peak at paragraphs where Barth specifically deals with their apparent subject matter — topic 12 at paragraph 35 ("The Election of the Individual") and topic 17 at paragraph 34 ("The Election of the Community"). Neither shows substantial presence throughout the rest of the *Dogmatics*.

We aren't concerned just with the doctrine of election though. We are just as interested in whether any topics representative of Christology or the doctrine of God in the post 33 chunk of the *Dogmatics* show evidence of influence by Barth's doctrine of election. Looking at the post 33 model, we find a few topics that are relevant:

> Topic 0: jesus christ god world place death son note testament event father resurrection dead men sin judge crucified time history obedience
> 
> Topic 3: man god christ grace faith sin covenant justification judgment jesus law doctrine divine righteousness eternal promise wrong sentence life revealed
> 
> Topic 20: man jesus son note human christ god essence spirit divine power holy exaltation place existence testament kingdom father faith death

There is no topic in the post 33 chunk that I would label as specifically about the Trinity as such. Instead we have a number of topics about creation, reconciliation, and the ethical life of the Christian community. This breakdown makes sense, given that creation and reconciliation are the doctrinal loci of the last two volumes of Barth's *Dogmatics*. In the three topics above, each of which specifically includes "jesus" and "christ," we can note a few things. Topic 0 describes the relation of Jesus to the Father in the context of the obedience of the Son in the work of salvation. Topic 3 engages the work of salvation again, but through the lens of justification, and God's eternal promise and covenant. Topic 20 is the closest we have to a "Trinity" topic with inclusion of "father," "son," and "spirit." In contrast to topic 14 within the model of the whole *Dogmatics*, this topic isn't focused on the concept or the mystery of the Trinity according to revelation. It is, rather, about God's work in the exaltation of the Son to bring the Kingdom of God and overcome death. It is Trinitarian, but about the outworking of God in the world.

Our analysis of the two smaller models coheres with our conclusions regarding the topic model of the whole *Dogmatics*. Barth's doctrine of election is explicitly only really present in those few paragraphs before and after paragraph 33 that specifically deal with election. Implicitly, it is hard to determine whether it is present elsewhere, though we can note a much stronger sense of history, drama, and event language in the topics of the model of paragraphs after 33. When there is Christological and Trinitarian language in those topics, it is about specific relations between the person of the Trinity, primarily the Father and Son, in reference to Jesus Christ. Such a shift, while certainly supporting McCormack's broad claim of a shift in the doctrine of the Trinity, does not speak specifically to the ontological claim that he makes however.

(In retrospect, I think there is ontological shift, but not shift that we can causally associate with the election paragraphs.)

[You may want to say that, in that case. Maybe that there is a correlation, but the evidence doesn't support causation.]

We have to ask whether topic modeling as such can weigh in on such claims...?

## Topic Modeling a focused corpus

Our topic models of the whole corpus and the segmented corpus provide data that can be interpreted in favor of McCormack's position on ontological shift. They are, however, by no means definitive, or clearly in favor of McCormack. To continue testing the thesis, we decided to focus the corpus. Given that the identify of Jesus is crucial to the debate, we chose to narrow the corpus to just those ten words before and after each instance of the word 'jesus.' This allows us to focus on Barth's language about Jesus and in which Jesus is directly and immediately relevant.

Similar to our topic models of the whole corpus, each document is a single paragraph of the *Dogmatics*, which is the most interpretively meaningful unit in Barth scholarship. We also ran the model with 20 topics to directly mirror the model of the full corpus. We find results similar to our original model: several topics are noticeably more significant in paragraphs prior to paragraph 33, the essential election paragraph, and several topics are noticeably more significant in paragraphs after paragraph 33, especially in paragraphs from 57 on, which are part of Barth's doctrine of reconciliation, often considered the home of his mature Trinitarian theology.

Figure: Topic 3 from focused corpus

> Topic 3: god revelation christ father son word jesus testament reality new also statement nazareth name thus fact according found gospel historical

Topic 3 represents a topic strongly associated with the doctrine of God, though it is both ontological and epistemological. While we have 'jesus' and 'christ' we also have 'father,' 'son,' and 'word.' Within the context of the later terms like 'reality,' 'statement,' 'fact,' and 'gospel,' which indicate both the formal character of this topic as well as it's focus on how knowledge of God's identity is possible, the topic's inclusion of 'son' and 'word' emphasize the divinity of Jesus and the divine relation to the Father as the Word of the Father. This is interesting balanced by the presence of 'nazareth,' as in Jesus of Nazareth, and 'historical.' We understand these inclusions as linked to the reference to 'gospel.' We do in fact find this topic very strongly in the first parts of the *Dogmatics,* including the sections on Scripture. It is significant that this topic is substantially present in paragraphs 4 through 15, with some presence 24 through 29, and very little thereafter. It's own formality and attention to epistemology match strongly with Barth's focus on the formal doctrine of the Trinity and the knowability of God early in the *Dogmatics.*

Figure: Topic 12 from focused corpus model

> Topic 12: christ, place, one, world, act, faith, christian, knowledge, event, reconciliation, whole, took, doctrine, activity, atonement, new, free, work, way, taken

Topic 12 has a consistent presence throughout all the paragraphs, but does see a rise in its average proportion of the paragraph in paragraphs 57 to 73. This is significant give that that is Volume IV of the *Dogmatics*, in which Barth elaborates his doctrine of reconciliation explicitly, which implicitly presents a mature Trinitarian theology. Paragraphs 57 through 59 are often of particular interest in this debate between McCormack and Hunsinger. Several key words in this topic stand out: 'act,' 'event,' 'reconciliation,' 'activity,' and 'work.' Jesus is understood, within this topic, in the context of God's reconciling work and activity. While we still 'doctrine' within the topic, the overwhelming sense of the topic seems to be about God's work in and through Jesus and the Christian's knowledge of it. While this sense of dynamism is present earlier in the *Dogmatics*, it appears to become more prominent in the final volume.

Figure: Topic 19 in focused corpus

> Topic 19: god, election, christ, man, divine, eternal, elected, decision, father, predestination, electing, decree, son, must, grace, name, doctrine, person, beginning, people

Topic 19 is very clearly about the doctrine of election. This set of words, as a common context of the word 'jesus,' indicate God's eternal decision of election, carried out in Christ. It's use of classical doctrinal language places it firmly in the context of dogmatic thought. We see, though, that this topic only has any significant presence in paragraphs 32 and 33, both of which specifically address election. This mirrors the election topic in the model of the whole corpus.

# Conclusion

So we have more evidence, but not stronger conclusions. We can suggest inferences, but not make assertions. The particular algorithmic approaches that we've outlined in this paper have represented a useful intervention in the debate between the so-called traditionalists and revisionists, but not one as decisive as we might have liked at the beginning.

However, this is an initial foray, and several areas do suggest themselves for further exploration: At some point, we have to get out of translations and start working in Barth's original German. We can also employ other, perhaps simpler, tests for indicating how the usage of certain individual words have changed, not just trying to track aggregate topics. And we could look at more corpora focused around a wider variety of words indicative of the topics we're interested in.

[Others you can think of? Feel free to throw them in.]


[^1]:	Footnote both

[^2]:	need citation

[^3]:	G&B, 92

[^4]:	For Calvin see institutes, bk 3, ch 21, sec. 5.

[^5]:	Need reference to this essay

[^6]:	citation

[^7]:	check this to be sure its right and footnote it

[^8]:	Add a quote here and cite

[^9]:	McCormack uses this formulation…quote him directly here

[^10]:	get some quotes/reference here, and probably drop the technical latin, since most of the audience would have no clue what it means

[^11]:	Hunsinger is also, notably, the one who labels his camp the “traditionalists,” and McCormack’s the “revisionists.” McCormack argues for a reversal of the labels based on older German readings of Barth. Give reference here to front of election and trinity by McC

[^12]:	find a reference

[^13]:	need reference

[^14]:	fix this latin and get a reference/quote

[^15]:	Find a reference

[^16]:	Blei , 2012. Get the real quote and reference

[^17]:	While the paragraphs immediately surround 33 also directly pertain to Barth’s doctrine of election…

[^18]:	Give a list of these terms
